docs/output.md, before:

# Ferlab-Ste-Justine/cnv-post-processing: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.


## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution
- [Exomiser](#exomiser) - Run exomiser analysis

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.

### Exomiser

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `exomiser/`
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.genes.tsv
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.html
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.json
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.variants.tsv
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.vcf.gz
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.vcf.gz.tbi

</details>

The Exomiser analysis generates six reports, which are stored in the exomiser subfolder for each sample. Each report uses the sample identifier as a filename prefix for easy identification.

For more details about these reports, refer to the [Exomiser documentation](https://exomiser.readthedocs.io/en/14.0.0/result_interpretation.html).

Commit message:

feat: CLIN-4402 add exomiser output dir option

docs/output.md, after:

# Ferlab-Ste-Justine/cnv-post-processing: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline.

By default, the directories listed below will be created in the output directory specified by the `outdir` parameter after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the root of this directory.

For certain steps, it is possible to specify a completely separate output directory using dedicated parameters. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this document assumes that the default results directory, as specified by the `outdir` parameter, is being used.

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution
- [Exomiser](#exomiser) - Run exomiser analysis

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.

### Exomiser

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `exomiser/`
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.genes.tsv
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.html
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.json
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.variants.tsv
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.vcf.gz
  - <SAMPLE_ID>.exomiser.vcf.gz.tbi

</details>

The Exomiser analysis generates six reports, which are stored in the exomiser subfolder for each sample. Each report uses the sample identifier as a filename prefix for easy identification.

For more details about these reports, refer to the [Exomiser documentation](https://exomiser.readthedocs.io/en/14.0.0/result_interpretation.html).

By default, exomiser output is saved in the `exomiser` subfolder within the main output directory. To save the output to a different location, use the `exomiser_outdir` parameter. In this case, the exomiser files will be written at the root of the specified location.
